What’s bike racing all about?
Bike racing unites the joy of riding a bike, the thrill of competition and pushing to be your best, the rewards of working together and sharing camaraderie with teammates, and combining fitness with skills and strategy. And there’s so much more.
“What’s racing all about” is different for every woman. We have the top-flight women who best the field again and again, while also taking time to help guide and support others. We have back-of-the-packers who know they’ll never achieve glory in the traditional sense, but feel their own glory in getting out there and pushing through, and sharing that experience with women who become some of their closest friends.
Some of us love the dirt, delighting in the unique (and often muddy) challenges of a cyclocross or mountain bike course. Some crave the speed and sun of the track. Some love the open road and the feel of the peloton. We share a willingness to work hard, and a strong desire to have fun at the same time.
We also work together for the sake of the team -- particularly in road and track races, individual racers might have specific roles to play within a race to help boost those with the likeliest chances of winning. You may also find yourself working with women from other teams for parts of a road or track race -- that is, riding in a rotating paceline to share the burden of the pull and the benefits of the draft so that all have a better chance of advancing in the field.
Many women who love their bikes but never thought of themselves as racers find great fulfillment once they’ve explored this world a little more.
What does being on a team involve?
Being on a racing team gives you a lot of benefits, and also carries some expectations of you.
As a team member, you’re one of a consistent group of cyclists who can train together, usually with similar goals and timelines, and that makes the workouts more efficient and more fun. You can learn a lot from more experienced racers -- everything from bike handling skills to how to pin on race numbers or use rollers.
Teams typically have at least one training ride per week during the fall and winter (and sometimes at other times of the year) and everyone needs to participate in many (not all) of those rides, as well as do additional training throughout the week. Teams may have clinics and workshops about topics such as hill climbing, nutrition and recovery and you’d be expected to attend as many of those as possible.
Of course, teams are all about racing. You’ll be expected to race a certain number of times each year; the number varies by team. Some teams have racers in all four disciplines (road, mountain, cyclocross, track); others focus on one or two.  Many teams engage in community involvement activities, and some sponsor races where you can either race or volunteer and learn more about the sport.
Do I chose a team, or do they choose me, and how does that work?
Sometimes team members know of a promising prospect and approach that person. Many other times, you make the first move by discussing your interest with a team and applying to join that team. (See below for more details.) Each team has different personalities and areas of emphasis. Check out the websites of all the teams, and chat with team members on the road, at events, or at the Meet the Team rides.
I’m not that fast. Might bike racing still be an option?
All bike racing requires a good level of physical fitness and strength. But you don’t have to be superhuman by any means. You’ll get more fit as you train with your team, for one thing. And, if you’re not one of the fastest kids on the block but you’re strong and agile, mountain bike or cyclocross racing could be great options for you.
Some racers start out on the road, then try MTB or cyclocross and never look back because they enjoy the dirt so much. While you don’t have to be super-fast, you do need to be willing to work hard and participate fully in various team workouts, races and other activities.
I’m slow on hills. Might bike racing still be an option?
Road bike races can involve some hills, and those can make the difference for some racers and their ability to stay in the pack (group). But some road races are flat, criteriums (short courses, usually in a town or city) don’t usually involve much of a climb, and track racing has no hills at all. Cyclocross can have some short, steep hills, and some have longer climbs, but they usually only make up a small part of a course, and cyclocross has  other sorts of barriers (literally). Mountain bike racing often includes hills (as the name would imply), but these can be ridden at your pace, and there are plenty of places where you can make up any time lost on a climb.
I’m in my 40s. Isn’t that too old to race bikes?
We have racers from their teens to their late-60s, and every age in between. Many don’t start racing until their 40s or 50s and beyond, and many older racers easily outpace their younger competitors. Think about it in terms of your fitness, not your age. And experience can count for a lot!
Isn't bike racing dangerous?
Bike racing carries some risks, as does any form of bike riding (and many other athletic activities). In road and track races, you often ride in very close proximity to others and at a relatively high speed. This means different sorts of risks than, say, commuting through downtown Seattle. Serious accidents are relatively rare, but they can happen.
Cyclocross and mountain bike races move at slower speeds and on dirt (or mud!) – falling can actually be fun and remind you of being a kid again - but as with any bike riding there’s a risk of injury in those disciplines too. Those who choose to race understand the risks, do what they can to minimize the risks, and believe that their joy in the sport is worth it.
How much does it cost?
Cost will vary by cycling discipline and the races you choose to do, and whether you choose to join a team (not required, but highly encouraged for the support and guidance you will receive).  Expect to pay around $25 to $40, give or take, for each race you do, though some teams may reimburse part of those expenses.
For road and track racing, you will need to buy a USA Cycling license ($70 per year; one-day licenses can be purchased for beginner categories at $xxx ) and WSBA membership ($25); this may be required for some mountain and cyclocross races also.
If you join a cycling team you likely will have to pay team dues; amounts vary, so ask individual teams that you’re interested in. Teams will usually require that you buy a new kit (team jersey and shorts, plus if desired other pieces of team apparel) each year (that’s necessary because sponsors, which are highlighted on our kits, can vary from year to year).
Depending on what types of races you do, you may have to drive or carpool some distance to races and those expenses typically aren’t reimbursed.
I have a family and a busy schedule so I don't see how I could be a bike racer. Thoughts?
Racing and related training and team activities do require a significant time commitment, though in some cases it’s not much more than the time you’re already spending on your bike. Many racers do have busy jobs and heavy family commitments; it helps to have a family that’s enthusiastic about your racing.
Some racers make it a family affair, with children or spouses/significant others who race or who attend races as supporters or spectators. To get a better feel for how racers juggle their various loves, chat with us at races or events (don’t be shy - racers love to talk about racing and their teams) or click the ASK WSBA link.
When is the right time to join a team?
Generally, team rosters are set in October, after a series of Meet the Team and Introduction to Racing rides in late August through early October (check the calendar - http://www.wsbaracing.org/calendar.html - and this website for details as the time approaches.) If you’re getting interested in racing at some other time of the year, there are lots of things you can do to prepare.
What can I do in the meantime?
You can start by clicking the ASK WSBA link to let us know of your background and interest, and we can get back to you with some specific ideas and more contact information.
Otherwise, going to a race and talking with team members at races is a great way to get started (check the calendar). You don’t have to be on a team to race, though some overall skill and bike handling ability is necessary and for some races you will need at least a one-day USAC license (usually purchasable at the race).
In the late spring and throughout the summer, you can take an intro track class at the velodrome (www.velodrome.org; see below for more details), then try some track racing, and get to know members of the various teams.
 CycleU (www.cycleu.com) offers many classes and bootcamps for road and cyclocross racing, including introductory sessions.
For mountain biking you can usually just show up and register to race on the day but some may require registration in advance if numbers are limited – see the website for the race for details. There are no training pre-requisites but make sure you ask around to understand how hard a course may be.
Beyond that, just riding your bike a lot and getting in good overall shape goes a long way.
What does it mean if someone says they are a “Cat 4“?
USA Cycling divides racers into racing categories depending on their experience and proficiency, with Category 1 being the most experienced and fastest amateur racers. Beginning road, track and cyclocross racers always start as Cat 4s (women) and Cat 5 (men), and usually (but not always) have their own field in a race so they’re not grouped in with the more experienced and faster Cats 3, 2 and 1. If you finish well in a specified number of races, you can look to upgrade to Cat 3, and potentially later to Cats 2 and 1.
In mountain bike races, the beginner category may be called “beginners” or, if it is sanctioned by USA Cycling, it is Category 3.  For some races, racers may be able to “self-seed” or choose which category they race in.
How fast are Cat 4 road bike races?
Speed at any given time during a race can vary, depending on terrain, weather, tactics being employed, and other factors. The pace speeds up for at least part of the field during attacks and then slows a bit for recovery. Sometimes races start out slower than you’d expect; other times they’re fast from the outset. When you’re part of a peloton or working with one or more other riders, you get benefit of the draft and can ride faster with 30 percent less effort. Generally speaking, Cat 4 women’s races in Washington range from an average of 21 to 23 mph for the winner to around 18 mph.
Tell me more about road racing.
In Washington state, the road season begins in late February or early March and lasts through early summer, with some criteriums continuing throughout the summer.
Time trials tend to kick off the season, followed by road races and then criteriums (crits). Cat 4 fields for road races are typically 20 to 40 racers. A Cat 4 road race is usually 24 to 45 miles, typically in two or more loops of the same circuit. The degree of hilliness varies.
Each race starts with what’s called a neutral rollout, in which everyone rides slowly together for a mile or so until the gun sounds and the race begins. The peloton stays generally together for the opening few miles, until attacks (one or more racers speeding up significantly for a short while as part of a tactic) begin and start breaking up the field. What happens after that varies depending on terrain and skill of each rider.
 Often the field gets broken into two or three or more smaller groups - and typically each of those groups works together even though each has competing teams represented. The pace, and attacks and other tactics, can ebb and flow throughout the race.
Road races are held away from Seattle in places such as Mason Lake or Sequim, so a few hours of driving often is needed early in the morning.
For more information: http://www.usacycling.org/how-to-start-racing-on-the-road.htm
What’s a time trial?
A time trial is each individual racing against the clock - you start alone, not as part of the group, and you ride alone, and your finish is determined by your time.
Racers start off at set intervals on a continuing basis, so you almost always can see other racers ahead of you, passing you, or returning from another direction on a loop.  You can pass and be passed.
A time trial in this area is around 10 miles, generally but not totally flat. A time trial is a good way to get your feet wet and work out some new-racer jitters - you can get a feel for all the necessary pre-race activities and warmups
